Policy on Interim Therapeutic Restorations (ITR)
58 O RAL HE ALTH POLICIES
REFERENCE MANUAL V 4 0 / N O 6 1 8 / 19
Review Council
Council on Clinical Affairs
Latest Revision
2017
Purpose
The American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry (AAPD)
recognizes that unique clinical circumstances can result in
challenges in restorative care for infants, children, adolescents,
and persons with special health care needs. When circumstances
do not permit traditional cavity preparation and/or
placement of traditional dental restorations or when caries
control is necessary prior to placement of definitive restorations,
interim therapeutic restorations (ITR)1 may be beneficial
and are best utilized as part of comprehensive care in the
dental home.2,3 This policy will differentiate ITR from
atraumatic/alternative restorative techniques (ART)4 and
describe the circumstances for its use.
Methods
This policy was developed by the Council on Clinical Affairs
and adopted in 2001. 
This document is a revision of the
previous version, revised in 2013. This updated policy is based
upon electronic database and hand searches of medical and
dental literature using the terms: dental caries, cavity, primary
teeth, deciduous teeth, atraumatic restorative treatment,
interim therapeutic restoration, AND glass ionomer; fields:
all; limits: within the last 10 years, humans, English, birth
through age 18. Additionally, websites for the AAPD and the
American Dental Association were reviewed. 
Expert and/or
consensus opinion by experienced researchers and clinicians
was also considered.
Background
ART has been endorsed by the World Health Organization as
a means of restoring and preventing caries in populations with
little access to traditional dental care.4-6 In many countries,
practitioners provide treatment in non-traditional settings that
restrict restorative care to placement of provisional restorations.
Because circumstances do not allow for follow-up care,
ART mistakenly has been interpreted as a definitive restoration.
ITR utilizes similar techniques but has different therapeutic
goals. Interim therapeutic restoration more accurately describes
the procedure used in contemporary dental practice in the
United States.
ITR may be used to restore, arrest or prevent the progression
of carious lesions in young patients, uncooperative
patients, or patients with special health care needs or when
traditional cavity preparation and/or placement of traditional
dental restorations are not feasible and need to be postponed.
7,8 Additionally, ITR may be used for step-wise excavation
in children with multiple open carious lesions prior
to definitive restoration of the teeth, in erupting molars when
isolation conditions are not optimal for a definitive restoration,
or for caries control in patients with active lesions
prior to treatment performed under general anesthesia.9,10 The
use of ITR has been shown to reduce the levels of cariogenic
oral bacteria (e.g., Mutans streptococci, lactobacilli) in the
oral cavity immediately following its placement.11-13 However,
this level may return to pretreatment counts over a period
of six months after ITR placement if no other treatment is
provided.12
The ITR procedure involves removal of caries using hand
or rotary instruments with caution not to expose the pulp.
Leakage of the restoration can be minimized with maximum
caries removal from the periphery of the lesion. Following
preparation, the tooth is restored with an adhesive restorative
material such as glass ionomer or resin-modified glass ionomer
cement.14 ITR has the greatest success when applied to single
surface or small two surface restorations.15,16 Inadequate cavity
preparation with subsequent lack of retention and insufficient
bulk can lead to failure.16,17 Follow-up care with topical fluorides
and oral hygiene instruction may improve the treatment
outcome in high caries-risk dental populations, especially
when glass ionomers (which have fluoride releasing and recharging
properties) are used.18-20
Policy statement
The AAPD recognizes ITR as a beneficial provisional technique
in contemporary pediatric restorative dentistry. ITR may be
used to restore and prevent the progression of dental caries
in young patients, uncooperative patients, patients with special
health care needs, and situations in which traditional
cavity preparation and/or placement of traditional dental
restorations are not feasible. ITR may be used for caries
control in children with multiple carious lesions prior to
definitive restoration of the teeth.